---
title: To Khoury College
description: The Students Don't Want This.
date: 2024-11-18
license: CC-BY 4.0
tags:
    - education
---

# To Khoury College

I had another post lined up singing the praises of the Design Recipe, but now
it's in dire need of our defense.

I want to make this very clear:

> **We, the students of Khoury College, do not approve of these upcoming course
> changes.**

The How to Design Programs curriculum teaches students how to think, and how to
approach good software design, rather than teaching them to use the current tool
du jour.

This post will be updated as I cohere my thoughts further and have more to say,
or as I get further information.

## Who am I?

I've taken the accelerated sections of CS 2500 and 2510, and am registered to
take CS 6410 this upcoming spring. I also want to take CS 4500 at some point,
which seems like it's also under attack.

I also was a TA for CS 2510 in the past summer, and for the accelerated section
of CS 2500 currently. I wanted to TA other courses, like accelerated CS 2510 and
potentially CS 4410/6410 in the future. I am also interested in teaching classes
in the Fundies/HtDP track as a career.

I want current and future students to get a good education, and I feel that
these changes undermine the value of a Khoury degree, even for students that
have taken the current versions of these courses.

I have my horses in this race and want Northeastern to remain a top-tier school,
particularly in the PL field.

## Designing Programs

> I am aware that the teaching languages used in CS 2500 (BSL, ISL, and ISL+)
> are not Racket, but I will be using the term "Racket" to refer to these
> interchangeably anyway; this is how they're used colloquially among students,
> and it helps keep this article a bit more concise.

The current introductory curriculum is to get students to _think about design_,
not teach a specific programming language. If anything, having a language that
has less practical industry use would be better to this end; we have students
that complain about the way that Java is taught in CS 2510, because it's not the
way that Java is _used_ in industry.

The HtDP curriculum enables students to approach problems in the right way,
letting data be the most important informer of how the code is laid out. It's
not impossible to incorporate these into a Python-based course, but it becomes
harder to teach a functional approach to software design, when imperative tools
are much more natural to use in that language. We would also have to immediately
show students advanced concepts they won't fully understand, such as classes
(instead of using simple structs in Racket). These topics need to either get
hand-waved away as "you'll learn what these do in OOD" or be presented
incorrectly to new students, both of which don't satisfactorily help these
students in the long term.

## Computer Science for Everyone

Khoury's main mission is "CS for everyone". It is not "CS should be easy".

Every course in Khoury should be very possible to pass given appropriate effort
from the student and knowledge of prerequisite topics as described by the course
listing. This is very much true of the courses I've taken so far: CS 2500, 2510,
2800, and 3500.

It's infeasible to make the introductory courses easier or worse to get more
people to pass them. In a classic case of
[Goodhart's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart's_law), changing these
courses to chase better statistics will end up in providing a worse educational
experience where more people pass, but everyone learns less as a result.
Admitting that classes need to become easier in order for more students to pass
them is an indictment of the faculty teaching them and an abdication of
responsibility to provide students with the best possible education.

## My Personal Experience

As stated before, I've taken many of the courses slated on the chopping block to
be either fully eliminated or heavily modified. I also want to take some more of
these in future semesters. It's worth going into how I feel about each one
individually.

### CS 2500 (Accelerated)

Let's start from the beginning.

I took the accelerated section of CS 2500 with Prof. Patterson in Fall 2023, so
this is still quite fresh in my mind. My section was naturally different from
the others, but I hope I can still speak generally here, from what I know
talking to other students that took the standard sections of the course.

I came into Northeastern with years of programming experience and felt like I
was too good for even the accelerated section and should be placed in OOD at
least. In hindsight, I think that having this opportunity would've been
detrimental to my interests - and know some people who regret testing out of
these classes as well.

I really loved the teaching languages in the course and the assignments started
to send me down the PL road that I'm on now. I wouldn't have discovered my
interest in programming languages if not for the specific design of this course.
It also gave me an entirely new way to think about my code and made me realize
how bad the code I've written was.

### CS 2510 (Accelerated)

As the natural next step of CS 2500, this class developed on a lot of these
concepts, with a specific focus on proto-OO object design with interfaces and
class extension. There are definitely some valid criticisms of this course, like
the blurry line between what's Fundies material vs. OOD material.

Beyond this however, I really enjoyed the course in the way it was taught by
Prof. Lerner. I don't have very much to say about this course considering it
felt like a stepping stone between CS 2500 and 3500; though it was very
informative and I'd highly recommend anyone to take it rather than skip.

## CS 2800

I took CS 2800 with Prof. Patterson, with his rework of the course, and it was
really quite good. It was definitely on the easier side for someone coming
directly from 2500 as it was in a familiar language with some additional
features. Once again this course had some PL-y undertones and helped me learn
about these topics further: Prof. Patterson connected me to Prof. Ahmed and the
Rocq Reading Group that ran this semester.

The course provided a gentle onramp into formal methods and verification topics
that students will otherwise never see in their coursework, and will never know
if they like it and want to pursue this area further. Mainly for these reasons,
I believe that this course should not only continue to be offered, but also stay
as a required CS course.

### CS 3500

I must admit this was my least favorite course on this list, but not for the
usual reasons. Unlike the previous courses where I thought I knew everything but
had my eyes opened, it was somewhat the opposite wit this one: I expected that
it would cover concepts I didn't know, but it was mostly going through the Gang
of Four's book in Java (I've previously written about these patterns in
[this post](/blog/gang-of-four)).

I'm certainly not opposed to this course existing, but I don't think it was
particularly _hard_, mainly just a lot of work - and I would be on board with
reducing some of that work for students. The actual concepts that the course
covers are complex, but students are very much prepared for this due to 2510.

### CS 4500

I haven't taken Software Development yet, but it was definitely in my plans to
do so, as long as it continues being offered (and I hope it does). Naturally, I
can't comment about what I liked about it or why it should stay, but it's very
much lauded as the better alternative to CS 4530, and offers a much more
in-depth approach to design and (most importantly) _talk about_ software.
Codewalks are the core of the course and build very important career skills for
students.

### CS 4410/6410

I also haven't taken Compilers, but am registered for it for next semester. I
like the course as it's structured now, without reverting to the classic (but
very old!) [Dragon Book](https://suif.stanford.edu/dragonbook/). The course
teaches a modern approach to compilers and it would be best for me to take it in
its current form to help me further my interest in programming languages and
compilers, and potentially do research in the [PRL](https://prl.ccs.neu.edu).

## Other Testimonies

I'm not the only one having these feelings about the course changes, and there
are many others that want to share their own opinion; I'll link to them in
[this list](/blog/khoury-list) and update it regularly.

Please note that this article is licensed CC-BY 4.0 in the hopes that this
allows further reach. I only ask that you credit anything from this article to
me, but you're free to use anything here.
