---
title: To Khoury College
description: Hear Us Out.
date: 2024-11-18
updated: 2024-11-26
license: CC-BY 4.0
tags:
    - education
    - khoury
---

# To Khoury College

I had another post lined up singing the praises of the Design Recipe, but first
I must defend it in the hour of need.

I want to make this very clear:

> **[We, the students of Khoury College](https://change.org/savefundies)[^1],
> want our voices to be heard as these changes to the curricula are being
> discussed.**

We are not asking to fully abandon the changes being worked on, some of the
changes being discussed are net positives. What we do want is for representation
in the process of making these changes.

The [How to Design Programs](https://htdp.org/2024-11-6/Book/index.html)
curriculum teaches students how to think, and how to approach good software
design, rather than teaching them to use the current tool du jour. In the spirit
of the Design Recipe, (as one of my friends put it) the most important thing
that we need to preserve through these changes is "the purpose statement, not
the implementation" of our current curriculum.

This post will be updated as I cohere my thoughts further and have more to say,
or as I get further information.

> This post was heavily edited on Nov. 23 as my understanding of the situation
> has changed significantly.

## Who am I?

I'm a second-year Computer Science student who has taken the accelerated
sections of CS 2500 and 2510. I'd like to take CS 6410 and 4500 in the future,
if they'll even be offered after the current or next semesters.

I also was a TA for CS 2510 in the past summer, and for the accelerated section
of CS 2500 currently. I want to TA other courses, like accelerated CS 2510 and
potentially CS 4410/6410 in the future. I am also strongly considering going to
graduate school, and potentially considering teaching classes in the
introductory track as a career.

I want current and future students to get a good education, and I feel that
these changes have the potential to undermine the value of a Khoury degree, even
for students that have taken the current versions of these courses.

I have my horses in this race and want Northeastern to remain a top-tier
undergraduate school, particularly in the PL field.

## Designing Programmers

The current introductory curriculum is to get students to _think systematically
about design_, not teach a specific programming language.

The HtDP curriculum enables students to approach problems in the right way,
letting data be the most important informer of how the code is laid out. The
actual language being used in the course is not the most important, but the
concepts being taught are vital. Python as a language has a lot of annoyances
that are not particularly conducive to introductory students, and I would prefer
if a more education-oriented language like Pyret was the first encounter
students have with designing good programs. Many advanced concepts in Python
need to be introduced for students to do even some basic things, and they'll be
oversimplified or hand-waved until they're ready to fully understand what
they're writing. In contrast, an education-oriented language will let students
build up from first principles without having this issue.

To adequately prepare students to become highly skilled software developers, the
introductory courses need to start from the ground up - and (especially for
students with prior experience writing code) filter out anti-patterns from the
way they write and reason about their programs.

## Computer Science for Everyone

Khoury's main mission is "CS for everyone". It is not "CS should be easy".

Every course in Khoury should be very possible to pass given appropriate effort
from the student, sufficent support from the course staff, and knowledge of
prerequisite topics as described by the course listing. This is very much true
of the courses I've taken so far: CS 2500, 2510, 2800, and 3500. If the course
offerings on satellite campuses don't sufficiently prepare students to take
higher level courses in Boston, those are the courses that should be updated to
be more rigorous. As
[Daniel Melcer](https://melcer.dev/2024/11/20/open-letter-khoury-curriculum.html)
put it, "it would be an error to let the lowest common denominator prevail".

It's infeasible to make the introductory courses easier or worse to get more
people to pass them. In a classic case of
[Goodhart's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goodhart's_law), changing these
courses to chase better statistics will end up in providing a worse educational
experience where more people pass, but everyone learns less as a result.
Admitting that classes need to become easier in order for more students to pass
them is a failing from the administration and shows the lack of support systems
in place for students to get the best education possible. This will be
counterproductive to the College's interests by creating worse graduates,
diminishing its reputation to employers and making it harder to serve its main
mission.

## My Personal Experience

> For a more concise summary of proposed changes, see
> [Owen's Post](https://owen.duckham.dev/blog/curriculum-info) outlining the
> currently available information. I'll be sprinkling in what I know along with
> my thoughts on it.

As stated before, I've taken many of the courses slated on the chopping block to
be either fully eliminated or heavily modified. I also want to take some more of
these in future semesters. It's worth going into how I feel about each one
individually.

### CS 2500 (Accelerated)

Let's start from the beginning.

I took the accelerated section of CS 2500 with Prof. Patterson in Fall 2023. My
section was a little different from the others, but I hope I can still speak
generally here, from what I know talking to other students that took the
standard sections of the course.

I came into Northeastern with years of programming experience and felt like I
was too good for even the accelerated section and should be placed in OOD at
least. In hindsight, I think that having this opportunity would've been
detrimental to my edication - and know some people who regret testing out of
these classes as well. Importantly, taking fundies changed the way I think about
the code I write, and got me out of the habit of many bad patterns.

Though not the primary purpose of the course, program design was approached from
a functional perspective, which offered my first real foray into the world of
functional programming. If it weren't for the design of the course, along with
the specific assignments, I wouldn't have discovered my interest in the field of
programming languages as early as I did (or ever). If I was allowed to skip the
proposed CS0 because of my AP credit, and take CS1 purely in Python, I don't
think I would be anywhere close to where I am now - both in terms of programming
ability and in terms of knowing what I want to do with my life.

### CS 2510 (Accelerated)

As the next course in the Fundamentals track, this course developed on much of
the concepts taught in Fundamentals 1, with a specific focus on some basic
object-oriented principles and transitioning towards imperative code. It
consolidates a lot of disparate but important topics in computer science and
presents them in a digestible way for students. This course lays important
groundwork that students need to progress further towards Fundamentals 3 and 4.

I also really enjoyed the course as taught by Prof. Lerner, and the assignments
were very useful to develop my skills as a software developer. It's still my
favorite class I've taken to date, but I also don't have too much to say about
it.

### CS 2800

I took CS 2800 with Prof. Patterson, with his rework of the course, and it was
really quite good. It was definitely on the easier side for someone coming
directly from 2500 as it was in a familiar language with some additional
features. Once again this course had some PL-y undertones and helped me learn
about these topics further: Prof. Patterson connected me to Prof. Ahmed and the
Rocq Reading Group that ran this semester.

The course provided a gentle onramp into formal methods and verification topics
that students will otherwise never see in their coursework, and will never know
if they like it and want to pursue this area further. Mainly for these reasons,
I believe that this course should not only continue to be offered, but also stay
as a required CS course.

### CS 3500[^2]

I must admit this was my least favorite course on this list, but not for the
usual reasons. Unlike the previous courses where I thought I knew everything but
had my eyes opened, it was somewhat the opposite with this one: I expected that
it would cover concepts I didn't know, but it was mostly going through the
[Gang of Four's book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_Patterns), but in
Java instead of in C++. I previously wrote a [post](/blog/gang-of-four) directly
inspired by my experience taking this course and my thoughts on the book.

I'm certainly not opposed to this course existing, but I don't think it was
particularly _hard_, mainly just a lot of work - and I would be on board with
reducing some of that work for students. The actual concepts that the course
covers are complex, but students are very much prepared for this, having already
taken Fundamentals 2.

> The below higher-level courses are in high risk of being eliminated or watered
> down to compensate for the lower standards taught in the introductory
> material. These are also classes that I haven't yet taken (and may not ever be
> able to take), so use the appropriate amount of salt for this segment.

### CS 4500

I haven't taken Software Development yet, but it was definitely in my plans to
do so, as long as it continues being offered (and I hope it does). I'm not
qualified to comment on what I liked about it or why it should stay, but it's
the culmination of the four-part Fundamentals track, and offers a much more
in-depth approach to design and (most importantly) _talk about_ software.
Codewalks are the core of the course and build very important career skills for
students. I fully believe that this course, or something substantially like it,
is critical to develop a student into a skilled and highly competent developer
\- and it very much raises the value of a Khoury graduate over those of other
schools.

### CS 4410/6410

I also haven't taken Compilers, but am registered for it for next semester. I
like the course as it's structured now, without reverting to the classic (but
very old!) [Dragon Book](https://suif.stanford.edu/dragonbook/). The course
teaches a modern approach to compilers and it would be best for me to take it in
its current form to help me further my interest in programming languages and
compilers, and potentially do research in the [PRL](https://prl.ccs.neu.edu).

## Other Testimonies

I'm not the only one having these feelings about the course changes, and there
are many others that want to share their own opinion; I'll link to them on
[the Voices page](voices) and update it regularly.

Please note that this article is licensed CC-BY 4.0 in the hopes that this
allows further reach. I only ask that you credit anything from this article to
me, but you're free to use anything here.

[^1]:
    I was actually not involved with the creation of this petition, but it is a
    clear indication of support from the general student population that they
    support keeping the unique nature of our curriculum through whatever changes
    may happen.

[^2]:
    I took OOD this past summer. It was not the "Fundamentals 3" that it was
    made out to be, and it probably would've been much more useful for me if I
    had taken it in the fall instead. From talking to Prof. Lerner recently
    about OOD, there are definitely portions that my class did not cover.
